# How-to-Score-More-Points-in-NFL-Games
For our research project, we chose to investigate the factors that contribute to passing plays in the National Football League (NFL) resulting in positive expected points added (EPA), to identify which factors ultimately impact EPA the most. Expected points (EP) is a metric used in the NFL that represents the number of points a team is expected to score on the current drive. The expected points added metric measures how a team’s expected points value changes on an individual play. Each play in an NFL game has many different moving parts, such as offensive and defensive formation, personnel, down, and distance to the first down marker. We were interested in developing a method to determine which factors on the football field are most important to determining a successful passing play, using EPA as our measure of success.

We worked with a dataset from the popular data analytics website Kaggle. The author of the dataset is Arya Shah. In particular, we used the file named ‘plays.csv’, which contained information on individual plays during the 2018-19 NFL regular season. This play-by-play data was likely collected by statisticians and analysts from various NFL organizations during actual games, and then made publicly available through league databases or popular sports analytics websites. This dataset initially contained 19,239 samples and 27 different features. Again, in this case, each sample represents an individual play run by an NFL team during the 2018-19 regular season. Some of the seemingly most relevant features in the original dataset were the current down on the play ran, the number of yards needed for a first down, the absolute yard line number, the result of the pass thrown (completion, incompletion, interception), and both the offensive and defensive personnel. Some features such as the description of the play were difficult to quantify, and others, like ones regarding identification of the specific game and play, were irrelevant to predicting EPA on any given play. One of the major limitations of the dataset is that it solely contains information on passing plays! We cannot draw any conclusions regarding rushing or special teams plays and how they relate to EPA.

Additional information on data management, model creation, and analysis can be found in the Jupyter notebook in this repository.
